Add tutorial: "Set up automatic testing for a Sphinx-based tutorial" (#26)
canonical/sphinx-docs-guide: tutorial/set-up-automatic-testing.rst

test** that runs through all the steps in your tutorial and outputs
any failures that may occur. And with Sphinx-based directives, you can guarantee that
your tutorial uses the same commands that Spread is testing.

.. note::

    Creating a spread test for your tutorial is not required to use
    the Sphinx starter pack; this is an optional capability.

**What you’ll do**

* Create a "Hello, world" spread test called ``example_tutorial``
* Run the spread test locally on your machine using Multipass

**Requirements**

* `Multipass <https://multipass.run/install>`_ installed on your machine 
* `Spread <https://github.com/canonical/spread>`_ installed on your machine

Create the spread test materials
--------------------------------

On your local machine, create a new directory called ``spread_test_example``
and change into it. This directory will house all the materials you need to
run your example spread test.

The materials for your spread test will be housed under the ``tests`` directory.
This is so that Spread can find the files needed to run the individual tests.
Create the ``tests`` directory using ``mkdir tests`` and change into it.

> Under the ``tests`` directory, create a new directory ``example_tutorial`` that we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the ``tests`` directory, create a new directory ``example_tutorial`` 
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

> will use to store the files needed. The "Hello, world" spread test will consist of two files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to store the files needed. The "Hello, world" spread test will consist of two files:
```

Author: Updated!

> will use to store the files needed. The "Hello, world" spread test will consist of two files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will use to store the files needed. The "Hello, world" spread test consists of two files:
```

Author: Updated!

``spread_test_example/tests/example_tutorial``, create the file
``example_tutorial.rst`` and add a title: 

.. code-block:: rst

    Demonstrate Spread tests capabilities with a "Hello, world" script
    ==================================================================

In this file, we will use ``literalinclude`` directives to feed the spread
test materials directly into our tutorial. This way, we guarantee that the
spread test is testing the exact commands that appear in the tutorial. 

Let's start with the bash script. In the mock tutorial, we want the the reader to
create the file themselves, so let's use that language in ``example_tutorial.rst``
when we include the script. Add the following text below the title:

.. code-block:: rst

    Create a new file ``example_bash_script.sh`` with the following contents:

    .. literalinclude:: example_bash_script.sh
        :language: bash

Here, we specified that the language of the script is ``bash``. Since our
tutorial file and the example bash script are located in the same directory,
we don't need to specify where the script is located when we use ``literalinclude``.

> Now we will insert the two commands that appear in our ``task.yaml`` file,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

> again using the ``literalinclude`` directive. At the end of the ``example_tutorial.rst``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of the ``example_tutorial.rst``
```

Author: Updated!

> file, insert the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file, insert the two commands that appear in our ``task.yaml`` file,
again, using the ``literalinclude`` directive:
```

Author: Updated!

> 

Reviewer: Highlight the lines being included

Author: Done, thanks!

.. code-block:: rst

    Make the script executable:

    .. literalinclude:: task.yaml
        :language: bash
        :start-after: [docs:make-bash-executable]
        :end-before: [docs:make-bash-executable-end]
        :dedent: 2

    Now execute the script:

    .. literalinclude:: task.yaml
        :language: bash
        :start-after: [docs:execute-bash-script]
        :end-before: [docs:execute-bash-script-end]
        :dedent: 2

    Congratulations! You have created a "Hello, world" script and executed it!

If you were to render the tutorial file using Read The Docs, then the page would
look like the following:

.. image:: mock-tutorial-example.png
    :align: center
    :scale: 75%
    :alt: rendered output of mock tutorial

Create the spread test
----------------------

Now we will create the spread test file and include our example tutorial. From the
``spread_test_example`` directory, create the file ``spread.yaml`` and insert the
following contents:

.. code-block:: yaml

    project: spread_test_example

    path: /spread_test_example

> We will designate the ``project`` name to be the same as the main directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Match the project name to the main directory's name, 
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

materials exist.

Now we need to tell Spread about the ``example_tutorial`` spread test. Add the
following section to the end of ``spread.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    suites:
      tests/:
        summary: example tutorial
        systems:
        - ubuntu-24.04.-64

The ``suites`` section is how we tell Spread about the various spread tests in
our project. We tell Spread to look in the ``tests`` directory for all spread tests
(which it will only find one, ``example_tutorial``). We also use the ``suites``
section to tell Spread about what system(s) we want Spread to test.
For our mock tutorial, we will use Ubuntu 24.04. 

Configure the spread test to use Multipass
------------------------------------------

Each job in Spread has a backend, or a way to obtain a machine on which to run
your spread test. The `Spread repository <https://github.com/canonical/spread>`_ contains
more information on backends like Google or QEMU, but we will set up Multipass as
a backend to run local tests. 

We will include the ``backends`` section of ``spread.yaml`` between the ``path`` and
``suites`` sections. Insert the following snippet into ``spread.yaml``:

> .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer: highlight inserted code lines

Author: Done, thanks!

In the ``allocate`` section, we define the image and name of the VM, launch the
VM, and then set up the proper SSH permissions so that Spread can log in (via root)
into the VM and insert the spread test. We also must tell Spread about the
IP address of the Multipass VM and set the environment variable ``ADDRESS``.

In the ``discard`` section, we delete the Multipass VM once the spread test
has finished running.

Run the spread test locally
---------------------------

List all available spread tests in the code repository:

.. code-block:: bash

    spread --list

The terminal should respond with a single line representing the
test for ``example_tutorial``:

.. terminal::
    :dir: spread_test_example
    :input: spread --list

    multipass:ubuntu-24.04-64:tests/example_tutorial 

Now let's run the spread test for ``example_tutorial``:

.. code-block:: bash

    spread -vv -debug multipass:ubuntu-24.04-64:tests/example_tutorial

The ``-vv -debug`` flags provide useful debugging information as the test runs.
The terminal will output various messages about allocating the Multipass VM,
connecting to the VM, sending the spread test to the VM and executing the test.

> If the test is successful, the terminal will output something similar to the following:

Reviewer: Everything from about here down seems to be about validating the results of the test, could use a separate section since it's not about running the test.

Author: Added a new section -- thanks!

run smoothly and as expected. You can accomplish this with
**Spread** -- a system-wide test distribution that automatically assigns jobs to run
tests in GitHub CI workflows. Using Spread, you can create a **spread
test** that runs through all the steps in your tutorial and outputs
any failures that may occur. And with Sphinx-based directives, you can guarantee that
your tutorial uses the same commands that Spread is testing.

.. note::

    Creating a spread test for your tutorial is not required to use
    the Sphinx starter pack; this is an optional capability.

**What you’ll do**

* Create a "Hello, world" spread test called ``example_tutorial``
* Run the spread test locally on your machine using Multipass

**Requirements**

* `Multipass <https://multipass.run/install>`_ installed on your machine 
* `Spread <https://github.com/canonical/spread>`_ installed on your machine

Create the spread test materials
--------------------------------

On your local machine, create a new directory called ``spread_test_example``
and change into it. This directory houses all the materials you need to
run your example spread test.

> The ``tests`` directory holds the materials for your spread test.

Author: Thanks -- updated!

In ``spread_test_example/tests/example_tutorial``, paste the following contents
into a new file ``task.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    ###########################################
    # IMPORTANT
    # Comments matter!
    # The docs use the wrapping comments as
    # markers for including said instructions
    # as snippets in the docs.
    ###########################################
    summary: Example tutorial

    kill-timeout: 5m

    execute: |
      # [docs:make-bash-executable]
      chmod +x example_bash_script.sh
      # [docs:make-bash-executable-end] 

      # [docs:execute-bash-script]
      bash example_bash_script.sh
      # [docs:execute-bash-script-end] 

The ``summary`` section contains a brief description of your tutorial, and
the ``execute`` section contains all the commands that your tutorial uses.
The ``kill-timeout`` option has a default of 10 minutes and doesn't need to be
included if your test will complete in that time frame. 

Using wrapping comments with syntax ``# [docs:example-wrapping-command]``
we can include the exact commands from ``task.yaml`` in the tutorial file.

Create the tutorial file
------------------------

> Now we have everything we need to create the tutorial file itself. In

Author: Good point -- thanks!

``spread_test_example/tests/example_tutorial``, create the file
``example_tutorial.rst`` and add a title: 

.. code-block:: rst

    Demonstrate Spread tests capabilities with a "Hello, world" script
    ==================================================================

> In this file, we can use ``literalinclude`` directives to feed the spread

Author: Thanks, I used Sphinx instead of reStructuredText because you can use `literalinclude` directives in MyST, too

      :end-before: [docs:execute-bash-script-end]
      :dedent: 2

  Congratulations! You have created a "Hello, world" script and executed it!

If you were to render the tutorial file using Read The Docs, then the page would
look like the following:

.. image:: mock-tutorial-example.png
    :align: center
    :scale: 75%
    :alt: rendered output of mock tutorial

Create the spread test
----------------------

Now let's create the spread test file and include our example tutorial. From the
``spread_test_example`` directory, create the file ``spread.yaml`` and insert the
following contents:

.. code-block:: yaml

    project: spread_test_example

    path: /spread_test_example

Match the ``project`` name to the main directory's name,
``spread_test_example``. The ``path`` designates the directory where the spread
materials exist.

Now we need to tell Spread about the ``example_tutorial`` spread test. Add the
following section to the end of ``spread.yaml``:

.. code-block:: yaml
    :emphasize-lines: 5-9

    project: spread_test_example

    path: /spread_test_example

    suites:
      tests/:
        summary: example tutorial
        systems:

>         - ubuntu-24.04.-64

Author: Thanks for testing and catching!

          multipass exec "$instance_name" -- \
            sudo sh -c "echo root:${SPREAD_PASSWORD} | sudo chpasswd"
          multipass exec "$instance_name" -- \
            sudo sh -c \
            "if [ -d /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/ ]
            then
              echo 'PasswordAuthentication yes' > /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/10-spread.conf
              echo 'PermitRootLogin yes' >> /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/10-spread.conf
            else
              sed -i /etc/ssh/sshd_config -E -e 's/^#?PasswordAuthentication.*/PasswordAuthentication yes/' -e 's/^#?PermitRootLogin.*/PermitRootLogin yes/'
            fi"
          multipass exec "$instance_name" -- \
            sudo systemctl restart ssh

          # Get the IP from the instance
          ip=$(multipass info --format csv "$instance_name" | tail -1 | cut -d\, -f3)
          ADDRESS "$ip"

        discard: |
          instance_name="example-multipass-vm"
          multipass delete --purge "${instance_name}"

        systems:
          - ubuntu-24.04-64:
              workers: 1

    suites:
      tests/:
        summary: example tutorial
        systems:
        - ubuntu-24.04.-64

> The Multipass backend is designated as ``type: adhoc`` as we are explicitly

Author: Updated to use bullet points -- thanks!

scripting the procedure to allocate and discard the Multipass VM. 

In the ``allocate`` section, we define the image and name of the VM, launch the
VM, and then set up the proper SSH permissions so that Spread can log in (via root)
into the VM and insert the spread test. We also must tell Spread about the
IP address of the Multipass VM and set the environment variable ``ADDRESS``.

In the ``discard`` section, we delete the Multipass VM once the spread test
has finished running.

Run the spread test locally
---------------------------

List all available spread tests in the code repository:

.. code-block:: bash

    spread --list

The terminal should respond with a single line representing the
test for ``example_tutorial``:

.. terminal::
    :dir: spread_test_example
    :input: spread --list

    multipass:ubuntu-24.04-64:tests/example_tutorial 

Now let's run the spread test for ``example_tutorial``:

.. code-block:: bash

    spread -vv -debug multipass:ubuntu-24.04-64:tests/example_tutorial

> The ``-vv -debug`` flags provide useful debugging information as the test runs.

Author: Good idea -- incorporated!

Set up automated testing for a Sphinx-based tutorial
====================================================

When crafting a tutorial, you may want to check that all the steps
run smoothly and as expected. You can accomplish this with
**Spread** -- a system-wide test distribution that automatically assigns jobs to run
tests in GitHub CI workflows. Using Spread, you can create a **spread
test** that runs through all the steps in your tutorial and outputs
any failures that may occur. And with Sphinx-based directives, you can guarantee that
your tutorial uses the same commands that Spread is testing.

.. note::

>     Creating a spread test for your tutorial is not required to use

Reviewer 2: there is a lack of consistency in the capitalisation of "Spread". i recommend a capital letter when referring to the project

Author: Thanks for catching -- I updated the capitalization!

.. code-block:: yaml

    ###########################################
    # IMPORTANT
    # Comments matter!
    # The docs use the wrapping comments as
    # markers for including said instructions
    # as snippets in the docs.
    ###########################################
    summary: Example tutorial

    kill-timeout: 5m

    execute: |
      # [docs:make-bash-executable]
      chmod +x example_bash_script.sh
      # [docs:make-bash-executable-end] 

      # [docs:execute-bash-script]
      bash example_bash_script.sh
      # [docs:execute-bash-script-end] 

The ``summary`` section contains a brief description of your tutorial, and
the ``execute`` section contains all the commands that your tutorial uses.
The ``kill-timeout`` option has a default of 10 minutes and doesn't need to be
included if your test will complete in that time frame. 

By wrapping commands with comments in the form of
``# [docs:example-wrapping-command]`` and ``# [docs-example-wrapping-command-end]``,
we can include the exact commands from ``task.yaml`` in the tutorial file.

Create the tutorial file
------------------------

Now we have everything we need to create the tutorial file itself.

> `ReStructuredText (.rst) <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext>`_ # wokeignore:rule=master

Reviewer 2: my personal preference (i thought it was in the Ubuntu style guide?) is to use labels for links in the text and define the URL labels at the bottom of the page

Author: I updated the text to use labels for links -- thanks!

The ``kill-timeout`` option has a default of 10 minutes and doesn't need to be
included if your test will complete in that time frame. 

> By wrapping comments with comments in the form of

Reviewer 2: "wrapping comments with comments" sounds off to me

Author: ah good catch, it should be "wrapping commands in comments". I'll update, thanks!
